Democritus: Fragments and Testimonia

4: "The Abderites also teach that there is an end [telos]. Democritus in his book 'On the End' says that it is euthymia, which he also calls euesto. He often adds, 'For enjoyment and lack of enjoyment is the boundary [horos].'" [PSA: other words for these states include harmonia, summetria, ataraxia, athaumastia, and eudaimonia.]

33: "Nature and teaching are close, for teaching reshapes [metarusmoi] the person, and in reshaping makes their nature [phusiopoiei]."

37: "The person who chooses the goods of the soul chooses what is more divine; one who chooses those of the body chooses what is human."

40: "People are happy not because of their bodies or possessions, but because of rightness [orthosune] and breadth of understanding [poluphrosune]."

45: "The wrongdoer is less happy than the person wronged."

59: "Neither skill nor wisdom is attainable, unless you learn."

64: "Many are polymaths but lack sense [nous]."

69: "For all people the good and the true are the same; but the pleasant is different for different people."

74: "Accept no pleasure unless it is advantageous." [PSA: presumably, advantageous to the soul.]

83: "The cause of going wrong [hamartie] is ignorance of the better."

119: "People fashioned an image of chance as an excuse for their own lack of counsel [aboulie]. For chance seldom fights with practical wisdom, and intelligent sharp-sightedness sets straight most things in life."

159: "If the body were to sue the soul for its pains and sufferings all life lnog, then if he were on the jury he would gladly convict the soul of having ruined some parts of the body by carelessness or dissipated them by drunkenness, and of having destroyed and rendered others by it susceptibility to pleasures. It is just like one's ready blame of the user of a tool or utensil in bad condition."

171: "Happiness does not dwell in flocks or gold; it is the soul which is the home of a person's daimon." Arius Didymus goes on to say that "He also calls it euthymia, euesto, harmonia, summetria and ataraxia. He says that it consists in distinguishing and discriminating [diorismou kai diakriseos] pleasures, and that this is the finest [kalliston] and most advantageous thing for humans."

187: "It is fitting for people to make more account of the soul than the body; for perfection of the soul rights badness of the body, but strength of the body without reasoning makes the soul not a bit better."

188: "The boundary [horos] of what is advantageous and disadvantageous is enjoyment and lack of enjoyment [terpsis kai aterpie]."

189: "It is best for people to live their life with as much cheer and as little pain as possible. This would happen if they would not get their pleasures from mortal things."

207: "One should choose not every pleasure, but pleasure at what is fine [kalos]."

211: "Moderation [sophrosune] increases what is enjoyable [ta terpna] and makes pleasure greater."

214: [courage is shown not only on the battlefield but also in resisting desires]

223: "What the body requires can easily be got by everybody without effort and misery; the things that require effort and misery and make one's life painful are desired not by the body but by the understanding's mistaking."

233: "If you were to overshoot the mean, the most enjoyable things would become most unpleasant."

235: "For people who get their pleasures from the belly, overshooting the appropriate point in eating or drinking or sex, the pleasures are brief and short-lasting, just for the time they are eating or drinking, while the pains are many. For they always have the desire for the same things; whenever they get what they desire, the pleasure quickly goes and there is nothing good in them but a brief joy. And then they need the same things again."

244: "Neither say nor do anything base, even if you are alone. Learn to feel shame before yourself far more than before others."

264: "Feel no more shame before other people than before yourself. Don't do a wrong thing any more if nobody will know than if every single person will know. Most of all feel shame before yourself, and set this up as a law for your soul, so as to do nothing inappropriate."

A 1.45 (Diogenes Laertius): "He says that the end is euthymia, which is not the same as pleasure, as some people mistakenly interpret it, but a state in which the soul lives calmly and stably, disturbed by no fear or superstition or any other passion."
