Hagiography

A hagiography is the story of the life of a saint. There's a story in
this collection of songs, an emotional progression, a maturation.

We begin with an Invocation. To the muses? Not quite. To a kind of
personal totem. I used to feel a great affinity for wolves, those
beautiful creatures of the northern lands. There's probably more
idealization than fact in this invocation (at least about the wolves).
But then all songs are really about the singer, not the subject. Despite
my basic sociability, I grew up a loner -- alone in my thoughts and
passions and dreams. I was wary of the traps that people laid for 
those with deep passion for life. I craved solitude. I avoided the 
entanglements of friendships and romance. I found release with my 
guitar and my music. And I liked that kind of arctic existence. I
preferred the lonesome beauty of an emotional February to the thawing
days of spring or the teeming heat of summer.

But the full experience of life requires the deep connection to another
human being found in love. At some level we all know this -- the desire
to find another self as Aristotle puts it -- but it can take a long
time to discover the need for love and to learn how to love. Some never 
learn, I suppose. It took me a long time.

Yet even love for another is only part of the story, for that love is 
one aspect of personal unfolding. My early way of living was a kind of
Pre-Emptive Strike -- narrow, restrained, limited, empty in many ways
(though full in potential and in my internal passions and dreams -- the
love inside that I mention in You Are Woman). I was hiding the sacred
fire I felt inside from the prying eyes and unknowing criticisms of
small-minded others. Although I could never be happy living hidden away
in that manner, I was able to protect my passion under a cold exterior, 
as a heavy blanket of snow protects the warm and fertile ground in 
northern climates (many of these songs reflect my upbringing in Maine).

So I needed to break out of that frozen way of living. And love was the
natural experience to draw me out, to help me realize that I was not the
Center Of The World, to lead me to a life unfurled, to begin to make
my passion for life real in the world, to live my dreams.

Naturally I didn't know what the hell I was doing. Who does at first?
But I'd locked myself away so tightly that it took me a long time to
learn to love. (I'm still learning.) There are some songs missing here
about my first love relationship (they're not very good so I haven't 
recorded them). Instead we see that relationship almost as a kind of
photographic negative -- it's there only by its absence. As I became
a more healthy person, that love wasted away, a dry featureless land all
drained of the sap of eros. Here I sing some words from Aeschylus in the
original Greek (which I was studying at the time -- there's no language
as gorgeous as Greek) -- In The Absence Of Her Eyes, gone is all the 
power of love.

So I was beginning to thaw out as a person. Yet that was a messy
process, as a great thaw always is. In Maine, the thaw comes in the
month of March -- a necessary experiment as it were, but a mess. Snow 
and ice melting into slush. Mud everywhere. No longer February's
lonesome beauty, but the messy reality of life. Yet no flowers or
greenery as yet -- those are in the future. One is thankful that March
has arrived, but is just as thankful once it has gone.

After March come the rains of April. As the children's rhyme says,
april showers bring may flower, what do Mayflowers bring? Pilgrims!
The instrumental part one of Pilgrimage is entitled The Rain. (I
wrote a lot of music for solo guitar around the same time.) Part two is
about the glacial process of dividing from another person -- a Long
Division. The split was fated from the beginning because I had been 
such an unhealthy person. Yet it was a decision that I made, in a 
cold-hearted, calculating sort of way because I knew that our
relationship would never work. As I say later in Emotional
Crayola, my reason was steady. Even if the process of dividing is 
emotionally wrenching, that kind of calculation is in the end cold and
dry. The one who makes that kind of decision has to live with the
emotional consequences, despite that fact that it's for the best.

The "remainder" of that decision was life alone again -- I remained
A Pilgrim on a continued pilgrimage in search of a new world that 
would be more hospitable to the depth of passion that I felt for living,
a relationship where I could feel at home on earth, could feel that my 
passion was not unnatural but in fact the most natural thing in the 
world. I could not live and love happily without revering that essential 
passion about myself.

Such serious songs and sentiments! Not "Passion". It's a welcome break, 
a fun, light-hearted expression of that core feeling I had. I was fresh 
out of school at the time, unemployed, travelling in Europe (I wrote the 
song in Holland), playing music in the streets a bit, feeling excited 
about a less obstructed future, but mostly living in the present and
appreciating that core passion I had for life even in the absence of a
relationship or a structured existence.

I wrote Gatekeeper Blues before that. It's a pure flirting song that I
wrote for the second woman I loved, whom I met as my first relationship 
started to fall apart. It's a kind of brazen song that was more bravdo
than reality. But it sure is fun to sing! In my mind I see it as a kind
of cross between Steamroller by James Taylor and They Call Me Doctor
Professor Longhair by Henry Roeland Byrd (a.k.a. Professor Longhair).

Heaven Sent is a kind of promissory note -- a promise to bring a life of
bliss to my third love. She had waited a long time for someone like me
to come into her life and I wanted to be worth her while.

Topology is another fun, unserious song. I was starting to loosed up by
this time and it shows in the music I was writing. It's an appreciation
for the sheer wonder of fitting together not only emotionally but also
physically. Firecracker continues that theme in a way that I never
thought I write about in words and music, but the song emerged in a kind
of white heat.

Emotional Crayola brings together many of the themes from the earlier
songs. I had started with a desiccated view of life, all black and
white. My first love relationship introduced a few colors but I got it
all wrong by removing all the borders in a hurry. My second love brought
more colors but too much strife to be sustainable. So each time my
reason was steady and I went looking for more colors with which to draw
a full picture of life, a joy and rapture in my own existence and in our
relationship together, a feeling as Michelangelo said that man is born
to glory and that such deep happiness is our birthright.

That depth of integration between two people was visualized by
Aristophanes in his image of lovers as two hemispheres that join into
one sphere. Although the two hemispheres are their own defined entities
they join together to form something greater than the sum of the parts.
Love as partnership in all senses. Being complete. Needing the other
person to feel completely alive, indeed even to survive.

So yes as You Are Woman says I was lonely for a long time but finally
I felt as if I had found someone who could match the passion I felt
inside, someone I could trust with everything I thought and felt, a
truly kindred spirit. What more could I do than to make her my own and
learn to love and cherish her in accordance with my highest potential?

