CHAPTER 1: FULFILLMENT

1.1 FOUR WAYS OF LIFE

We begin with a thought experiment.

Imagine you have earned enough money that you no longer need to work. What would you do with the rest of your life?

Aristotle gives you four options:

1. Making Money
2. Having Fun
3. Giving Back
4. Seeking Truth

Although we’ll look at more alternatives in the last chapter, these are the four ways of life that came to mind for the ancient Greeks.

Aristotle quickly dismisses the first option: you already have enough money, so why would you organize your life around earning even more money?

One justification might be to amass the things that only extreme wealth can buy: more luxurious pleasures, higher status in society, power over other people, outsized influence in government, even the possibility of becoming a supreme ruler yourself. Reading between the lines, as we often must do, we can see Aristotle dismisses these desires, too. So the life of Making Money doesn’t make the cut.

The second option has wider appeal, in ancient times as well as today: after all, we moderns have had our heads filled with endless visions of la dolce vita, complete with travel to exotic locations, fun in the sun, wining and dining, amusements and entertainments, fancy cars, fashionable clothes, second homes, and everything else our consumer-oriented society has to offer.

While Aristotle is not one of those ascetic philosophers opposed to enjoying life, at the same time he is not in favor of unreflectively satisfying the unlimited desires of the natural self. In fact, he holds that the self is not a natural endowment at all, but a personal achievement.

More specifically, Aristotle maintains that an impulsive person is buffeted about in many directions and lacks the consistency of thought, desire, action, and emotion necessary to have a stable self in the first place. Similarly, he insists that someone who is thoroughly corrupted or vicious has strayed so far from the inherent potentials of human existence as to also lack true selfhood.

For us this is counter-intuitive, because we tend to think that nothing is more natural than the self, and that the self consists of whatever thoughts, desires, actions, and emotions a person happens to have; this is why we also tend to think that someone who acts to satisfy their arbitrary desires is selfish.

By contrast, Aristotle holds that a person’s desires are not undeniable urges to be unthinkingly gratified, but raw materials to be pruned, moulded, shaped, and sculpted. He would say that only by advancing though a lifelong process of education, cultivation, maturation, and soulcraft can you graduate to living a fully human life. Therefore someone who mindlessly satisfies their arbitrary desires isn't necessarily building up their selfhood or personhood - it all depends on whether those desires are informed by deliberation, reflection, and an ideal of what it means to be human. And that’s definitely not the case for the life of Having Fun.

The third option, Giving Back, better befits someone who takes life seriously. This is the life of civic engagement, philanthropic endeavor, healing the sick, strengthening the well, educating the young, honoring the old, venerating the gods, cultivating brotherhood, providing wise leadership, and all the other pursuits that can fall under the broad heading of statecraft.

This way of life is more beautifully right than Making Money or Having Fun because human beings are inherently social creatures. We are born into a society that existed long before we arrived and that will exist long after we are gone. The activities that define our highest possibilities as human beings - language, history, technology, medicine, the sciences, the arts, religion, philosophy - are sustained and extended only by continued collaboration across generations and millennia. Both individually and collectively, we need to work at being human.

Thus you can achieve great nobility in statecraft, if you can avoid the ever-present temptations of power and privilege. As we’ll see in Chapter 2, two thrivings of character in particular are the keys to right conduct in the social realm: moderation and justice. These virtues can be difficult to cultivate and put into practice, but they are worthy of aspiration for anyone who wants to be successful as a human being.

So is an active life centered on Giving Back as good as it gets, or does human nature harbor even higher possibilities?

Wherever philosophy has arisen - especially in the ancient civilizations of Greece, China, and India - thinkers have speculated that there is something more. This something more has gone by many names: the examined life, the love of wisdom, living in truth, the vita contemplativa. The yearning for this fourth way of life is inspired not by the action-oriented wisdom of statecraft, but by the passionate search for passionless truths, for understanding the human condition, for deep insights into the nature of existence and what it means to be human - in a word, for sagacity.

In founding the sciences of logic and biology, and in contributing fundamentally to nearly every intellectual discipline existing in his day, Aristotle laid claim to the designation that Dante bestowed on him some 1500 years later: “the master of those who know.” In this sense, few people have equalled Aristotle in the fourth way of life, which we can call Seeking Truth.

Certainly Aristotle rose into the rarified air of world-historical intellectual achievement, but as we’ll explore in Chapter 5 sagacity is not limited to great scientists and philosophers; instead, it is open to anyone who takes truth seriously by stretching themselves out toward greater awareness and understanding.

Finally, these four ways of life are not necessarily exclusive or antagonistic: properly understood, they build on each other, can be pursued with different weights at different times of life, and at some level must be combined in order to find lasting fulfillment in life. This will be one of the primary themes on our long walk with Aristotle.

1.2 THE NATURE OF LIFE

Aristotle was the first biologist, focusing especially on what today we would call zoology. Around one-third of his extant writings are devoted to his inquiries into the structure, physiology, and behavior of animals. In this domain, his researches were of fundamental significance; indeed, Charles Darwin once said that in biology his "two gods" Linnaeus and Cuvier were "mere school-boys to old Aristotle”!

One of Aristotle's deep insights into living organisms is that they act for their own sake, in two senses. First, an organism's activities benefit it. Second, its activities serve a purpose within the organism's way of life. This two-fold "for-the-sake-of" relationship applies exclusively to living organisms, because only by staying alive do they remain in existence, and the process of staying alive simply is activity, specifically the characteristic activities of a given species in a given environment.

It’s helpful to contrast such a living organism with a natural but inanimate object. For instance, we can say that a river is full of life and activity and motion, but the river itself is not alive and it doesn’t act for its own sake or initiate its own motion - only the plants, fishes, birds, otters, and other organisms that live in and around the river can do that.

Although this "for-the-sake-of" relationship is in fact quite straightforward and scientific, throughout intellectual history there has been great confusion about it. With regard to the beneficiary of action, Aristotle is quite clear that the beneficiary of action is the individual, not the species or the so-called “selfish gene.” As Aristotle puts it, in reproduction it is the organism itself that reaches out for immortality in the only way it can.

On the other hand, some interpreters have claimed that only the organism itself can benefit; yet this kind of biological or psychological egoism is entirely absent in Aristotle. For example, in Aristotle’s biology reproduction is a core instance of action that benefits an organism. Furthermore, as we’ll see in Chapter 4, Aristotle thinks the shared activities that feature so prominently in love, friendship, and community are the highest applications of human virtue.

With regard to activities serving a purpose within an organism's way of life, medieval notions of so-called final causation (a term Aristotle never uses) have misled interpreters into believing that Aristotle claimed future states could "reach back in time" to cause earlier events. Similarly, medieval notions of teleology (another term Aristotle never uses) have led interpreters to attribute consciously held purposes to all living organisms, even plants and pre-conceptual animals; failing that, such interpreters have believed that such purposes must exist somewhere, so they've attributed them to an all-powerful creator.

Yet there is no more mysticism in saying that an activity "serves a purpose" within an organism's way of life than there is in talking about "forces" in physics or "bonds" in chemistry. Consider, for example, the play behaviors of nearly all mammals and some other animals. Such behaviors serve the purpose of preparing young animals for the physical, perceptual, and social challenges of adulthood. Yet a young otter, for instance, doesn't form a conscious purpose of self-improvement before engaging in play behavior, nor does the “future self” of the young otter bring about its earlier play behavior through some sort of backward causation.

For Aristotle, aliveness is a continuum. All living things have needs for sunlight, water, warmth, nutrition, reproduction, homeostasis, and the like. Because animals have perception and movement, they not only have needs (as even plants do) but also have wants. In their characteristic activities they seek to gain what appears to them beneficial or good. They not only live, but have a way of life.

An animal’s way of life consists of myriad aspects: whether it walks, flies, swims, or slithers; whether it hunts, grazes, fishes, or farms; whether it nests in trees, burrows underground, or builds a shelter; whether it is nocturnal or diurnal; whether it lives alone, scattered about, in herds, or in dense settlements like bees’ nests and human cities; how it reproduces and raises its young; how long it takes to develop from newborn to adult; how it interacts with other members of its species; how it perceives the world; how it communicates; and so on.

Once an animal has matured to adulthood, it is in some sense complete and thus can engage in and benefit from the activities that are characteristic of its species. Living its way of life is its purpose, and its flourishing or fulfillment is the activation of its capacities in action.

Thus we see that Aristotle’s view of the universe is very much biocentric. Under the influence of modern physics, nowadays we often think that atoms and subatomic particles are the building blocks of the universe, and therefore the most real things there are. By contrast, Aristotle thinks that living things are the most natural of things.

1.3 BEING HUMAN

Aristotle also thinks that human beings are the most alive of living things. The reason is that we have so much more complexity and optionality in how we live, caused by the fact that we have thought and speech and a sense of the past and the future.

The factors of complexity and optionality apply to just about everything we humans are and do: how we source our food (hunting, gathering, nomadism, fishing, farming); where we live (deserts, islands, mountains, river valleys, tundra); our family systems (nuclear, extended, communal); our social arrangements (tribes, clans, towns, cities); our forms of political economy (city-states, republics, feudal kingdoms, modern nations); our technologies (pre-agricultural, agricultural, industrial, post-industrial); our religious rituals, myths, and theologies (animism, polytheism, monotheism); and so on.

More generally, above and beyond the needs and wants that other animals have, we humans also generate wishes, form preferences, make commitments, and take action in ways that are structured by long-term goals, societal expectations, religious beliefs, philosophical ideals, and the like. We can succeed (or fail) in both reflection and conduct; we can not only live, but live well.

Furthermore, just as living is a continuum, so also is living well. One of the challenges of being human is that there are many ways to miss the mark in life and perhaps only a few ways to hit it. Aristotle sketches out the following possibilities:

1. Some people are from birth so lacking in forethought and other basic human capacities that sadly they lead a kind of animal existence (although such a state can also be induced by a brutal upbringing such as that imposed in ancient times by the barbaric Scythians). 
2. Others, altogether the worst, fall so far short of their human potential that they descend into corruption and thus choose purposes that are unworthy, take actions that are harmful or bad, and act for reasons that are downright ugly. 
3. Somewhat better are those who wish for what is good but whose thoughts and actions can be warped by harmful or excessive desires and pleasures, so that they act impulsively or lapse into self-indulgence; they might function well in some areas of life but miss the mark in areas where they cannot resist temptation (e.g., they might be unfaithful spouses, heavy drinkers, social climbers, or shallow materialists). 
4. The more decent sort of person experiences the same kind of desires and pleasures as the impulsive or self-indulgent person, but is able to overcome them through force of will, and thus to act with self-control. 
5. Altogether good are those who activate the highest human capacities, achieve personal excellence, and truly delight in acting for the sake of what is admirably appropriate and beautifully right. 
6. Even beyond such human thriving might lie a kind of godlike excellence or blessedness verging on transcendence of the all-too-human, perhaps attained by heroes, saints, and sages. However, Aristotle doesn't provide a roadmap for approaching this blessed state, so it might not be all that helpful to us.

As this brief overview indicates, human beings can vary widely in worth (a fact that might offend our modern-day egalitarian sentiments). Human beings who are not guided by wisdom, justice, and moderation can be the worst of animals; but if they are so guided, they can be the best of animals and even approach the gods for blessedness.

1.4 ENCULTURATION AND MATURATION

Aristotle observes that it is difficult to live well if you are not raised well, because small differences in the beginning can lead to significant differences in the end.

Naturally, this introduces the large topics of child-rearing and education, which were just as central in ancient Greece as they are for us today. The Greeks focused on training their children in three areas: physical exercise for the body, language for the mind, and music for the soul. At least for boys, physical training prepared them for military service and courage in battle, which was important because Greek city-states were often at war with each other. Training in the Greek language prepared them for participation in the life of society: for absorbing the heritage of the Homeric poems, for elegant expression in public, for the giving and taking of wise counsel. Training in music and higher culture helped to shape their emotions and direct their character traits toward the noble ideals of moderation and justice.

Yet these forms of enculturation can take a person only so far. Aristotle often draws a distinction between two kinds of person or parts of the soul: the one that can listen to orders and follow directions provided by external authorities, and the one that has internalized the reasons for action and thus can independently make its own decisions and set its own direction. The first is enculturation, the second is a more complete state of soul that we can call maturation. The enculturated person can follow the rules and customs of society, but the mature person can better handle ambiguous situations where it’s unclear which rule and customs to follow (since they might be in conflict) and, indeed, whether society’s rules and customs are in actuality beautifully right. 

We are formed by society; yet any society that has the power to form us also has the power to deform us along various dimensions. A classical example is ancient Sparta, which shaped its citizens so singlemindedly for success in war that they were ill-equipped for peacetime activities; yet as Aristotle observes, war is for the sake of peace, not the other way around.

Thus an important aspect of maturation is learning to see how the society in which you’ve been raised might be skewed in various directions, thereby leading you astray from the balanced “middle range” where human flourishing happens. As we’ll explore more fully in Chapter 6, among 21st century Westerners these societal deformations might include granting too much value to getting ahead, making money, acquiring possessions, using technology, exercising political influence, and changing the world instead of oneself.

1.5 THE SELF AS AN ACHIEVEMENT

If the goal of philosophy as a way of life is to form and change oneself, then unsurprisingly the question arises: what is the self?

We moderns tend to think of the self as a bundle of whatever beliefs, desires, notions, and emotions someone happens to have, even if that bundle isn’t very well-defined; this is why we also tend to think that someone who acts to satisfy their desires is selfish.

Yet for Aristotle, the self is not a natural endowment but a personal achievement. Although to our ears it sounds paradoxical to say that not everyone has a self, Aristotle maintains that full personhood emerges only when you have developed an inner harmony among all aspects of your soul.

Consider a scenario in which your desires drag you in one direction (say, to flirt with someone other than your spouse), your conscious thoughts would restrain you from acting that way (because intellectually you are convinced that anything approaching adultery is wrong), and as a result your emotions are all in a jumble (simultaneously urging you on and shaming you into doing the right thing). In this situation, you are not at one with yourself and thus you don’t have a single, coherent, stable self. By contrast, Aristotle argues that selfhood requires consistent integration among the parts of the soul, which in turn generates a strong sense of inner freedom and equilibrium.

But is absolute psychic unity unrealistic? On occasion everyone except the blessedly perfect sage might experience tensions among their thoughts, desires, and emotions. Yet Aristotle does not require perfection; instead, he maintains that a consciously-held conception of the highest good achievable by human beings functions as a regulative ideal which can both guide our actions and shape our emotions.

1.6 TAKING LIFE SERIOUSLY

Not everyone has such a vision of the best life for human beings. Does that make Aristotle an elitist? In a sense, yes: he is not trying to convince even bad people to be good, but to help good people understand how to be even better.

For Aristotle, human fulfillment is the lifelong activity of living well, not a succession of pleasurable feelings. Those who take seriously our present-day conception of happiness as contentment or enjoyment make Aristotle relevant to people today but at the cost of trivializing his abiding contribution to the philosophical understanding of human flourishing. By contrast, those who recognize the trivialiality of our present-day conception of happiness understand that Aristotle's deepest insights are relevant to serious people of all times.

As I see it, we have a fundamental choice: either we can democratize Aristotle as a kind of self-help guru and thus bring him down to the level of the average person today, or we can aspire to raise ourselves up to Aristotle's philosophical level and thus join the aristocracy of the human spirit.

The second path leads us to treat living an examined, fully human life as a great and challenging task which is not for everyone. At root, that task is a matter of taking life seriously in a number of ways that we will explore in the remainder of this book.

