CHAPTER 2: CHARACTER

2.1 TAKING GOODNESS SERIOUSLY

The first aspect of life to take seriously is goodness: the potential to raise yourself above a merely animal existence by activating your highest human capacities for action and emotion, doing and feeling, aspiration and exaltation.

Some people are naturally good in certain ways: for instance, they might not be prone to anger, jealousy, intemperance, or fear; they might tend to be gentle, generous, kind, or brave. Yet these qualities, which nowadays we would call personality traits, aren’t always balanced or reliable, and can even get you into trouble: we are all familiar with people who are generous to a fault or who are so mild-mannered that they don’t feel righteous indignation at manifest injustices.

For Aristotle, more balanced and reliable than these inborn dispositions are acquired traits of character. Traditionally these have been called virtues and vices, but I render the Greek terms as thrivings and failings. Thrivings are more balanced because you actively direct them based on your understanding of the human condition, and they are more reliable because you intelligently adjust and apply them in particular circumstances.

As a first approximation, goodness can be achieved by steering clear of extremes in your actions and reactions (recall the Delphic maxim “nothing to excess”). Aristotle draws an analogy to archery: your arrows can either fall short of the target or overshoot it. Thus for each thriving there are not one but two kinds of failing: for example, the courageous person finds a middle range between cowardice and rashness, while the generous person finds a middle range between wastefulness and stinginess.

However, merely avoiding extremes doesn’t necessarily get you where you want to be. Hitting the target in action and emotion is a matter of identifying and enacting what is appropriate or fitting in a given situation, and this entails more than simply “too much” or “too little.” Goodness has many aspects: doing and feeling at the right time, with regard to the right kind of person, to the right extent, at the right speed, with the right frequency, for the right reasons, etc.

Thus Aristotle argues that, for instance, apparent bravery in battle isn’t true courage if a soldier behaves that way in routine situations, toward non-combatants, out of proportion to the current threat, in ignorance of the dangers he faces, or because he’s trying to avoid a court-martial. Similarly, a truly generous mother would help her child in ways that are attuned to her child’s current needs (e.g., for moral instead of financial support), the history of their relationship, and her goals for her child’s development (e.g., to encourage the child’s eventual independence).

Above and beyond what’s appropriate or fitting is what’s beautiful. Although this way of characterizing goodness is typically Greek, nowadays we might still say to someone “that was a beautiful thing you did.” Identifying what makes an action beautiful is not straightforward, since there is an aesthetic element involved; yet in such actions we can perceive elements of grandeur, significance, harmony, fluency, style, proportion, discernment, devotion, seriousness of purpose, and a special degree of fit to the occasion.

Although people who take goodness seriously might not consistently attain what is admirably appropriate or beautifully right, they at least aspire to that height of action and emotion.

2.2 PLEASURES AND PAINS

Aristotle ties all the thrivings and failings of character to how you handle the pleasures and pains of life. Whereas with our materialist mindset we moderns tend to think of pleasure and pain in physiological terms, Aristotle applies the terms to a wide range of experiences and emotions. For instance, he observes that human beings rejoice at acquiring wealth and bemoan its loss; similarly, we experience anger as distressing and fear as disturbing. Naturally, he also recognizes the more bodily pleasures we derive from the senses of smell, taste, and touch, which he associates with those aspects of life that we have in common with other animals.

Moreover, Aristotle holds that for human beings all activities have their own inherent enjoyments, along several dimensions. One dimension is carnal vs. spiritual or perceptual vs. intellectual: the joy of sex differs from the joy of having a meaningful conversation with the one you love, the joy of basking in the sun differs from the joy of understanding solar physics, the joy of witnessing a dramatic performance differs from the joy of discussing it afterward with your fellow theater-goers. A second dimension is active vs. passive or making vs. use: the joy of cooking differs from the joy of eating, the joy of making music differs from the joy of listening to it, the joy of loving differs from the joy of being loved.

One of the dangers of pleasure is that human beings can all too easily pursue for its own sake, unmoored from the underlying activity. Instead of simply cherishing the times when we get to break bread with our friends, we become fixated on the ever more refined and expensive pleasures of gourmet dining; instead of celebrating social occasions with a glass of wine, we drown our sorrows in binge drinking; instead of taking quiet satisfaction in prudently planning for retirement, we thrill to gambling on risky investments.

Aristotle argues that pursuing pleasure for its own sake inevitably leads you astray because it corrupts your character and warps your understanding of human life. By contrast, being content with the inherent joy of an activity preserves your good character and reinforces your insights into the human condition.

2.3 SOULCRAFT

Aristotle wrote three books with "ethics" in the title: the Nicomachean Ethics, the Eudemian Ethics, and the Great Ethics (or Magna Moralia). To our ears, “ethics” brings to mind commandments, guardrails, and other restrictions on behavior. Yet because the Greek word for ethics is derived from the Greek word for character, I prefer to talk about soulcraft. Whereas the political art of statecraft pertains to the public, communal world of societal governance, the ethical art of soulcraft pertains to the private, personal world of cultivating your highest self.

At the same time, one of Aristotle’s most frequently quoted observations is that human beings are social animals. This is why so many character traits and their associated activities are concerned with community commitments (e.g., courage), social interactions (e.g., moderation), and interpersonal relationships (e.g., love).

More precisely, Aristotle says that humankind wavers between a social mode of living and a solitary mode of living. The fact that we tend in both directions is part of why the human condition is a matter of such high complexity. Because Aristotle characteristically does justice to this complexity, his account of soulcraft goes beyond the modern dichotomy of individualism vs. altruism. In our most meaningful personal relationships, each person cares about and acts on behalf of the other for their own sake and because of who they are. Thus although the goal of life is to complete yourself, a completely solitary life is not complete; a person can’t wholly flourish without flourishing friends, family, and fellow citizens.

And yet, just as you can’t be financially giving if you haven’t first built up the quantity of wealth that makes free-hearted generosity possible, so also you can’t be giving in your relationships if you haven’t built up the qualities of character that make love, friendship, and brotherhood possible. As Socrates argued at his trial in Plato’s Apology, soulcraft is the source of the truest wealth in life.

Like a tree that has grown deep roots as it has reached upward to the sun, these truest qualities of character are what make you reliably you; as a result, not only can those you love trust you to act and react in characteristic ways, but perhaps even more importantly you can trust yourself to do so. When this character of yours is wedded to serious goodness, then it becomes, as Heraclitus said, a kind of inner divinity.

2.4 SELF-MASTERY

However, the path to this trustworthy state of the soul, which we can call self-mastery, is not necessarily straight or easy. At a high level, Aristotle identifies three stages, which we can explain chronologically even though they might persist across other times of life.

First, consider a young person such as your author in his late teens and early twenties: I was often inconsistent and even self-indulgent, acting without much restraint as I experimented with the boundaries of social norms. Not only did I possess an incomplete understanding of what it means to live well as a human being, but what understanding I did possess was vulnerable to being overruled by sudden feelings and intemperate desires in the heat of the moment. As an example, I was awfully prone to anger, sometimes bordering on belligerence.

As I slowly matured, I gained a clearer understanding of how to live. At times I still experienced what felt like inexplicable anger, but I used my newfound understanding to restrain myself and act in more reasonable ways. The result was a self-imposed consistency of action, which I experienced as somewhat strained and unnatural because my feelings and doings weren’t in complete harmony as I not infrequently needed to bite my tongue. Aristotle calls this in-between state self-restraint and does not consider it to be an unqualified thriving of the soul, since ideally a person moves beyond unhealthy impulses that need to be restrained.

Eventually I achieved a more organic consistency and inner harmony, in which acting and feeling in a gentle way became second nature. It is this kind of second nature that Aristotle calls an acquired trait of character, such as the thriving of gentleness as opposed to the failing of belligerence. Along with that thriving came a deeper understanding that unbridled anger is an ugly emotion which has no place in a more beautiful way of life.

In the ancient Greek pantheon of thrivings, two other character traits figure prominently in self-mastery: courage and moderation.

As to courage, we mustn't forget the cultural and historical context: that of small city-states plagued by endemic warfare (e.g., Athens and Megara, 40km apart, experienced armed conflict on and off for centuries). The Greek word for courage meant both bravery and manliness: if the menfolk did not demonstrate courage in battle, a town could be destroyed, with the men killed and the women and children sold into slavery. For the ancients, courage in defense of one’s family, friends, and community was serious business.

In Aristotle’s account, courage enables you to feel the appropriate levels of fear (a painful emotion) and hope (a pleasurable emotion) when confronted with the possibility of dying in battle, and then to act accordingly. It's true that he does mention other varieties of courage, since you can be brave when you might lose  your health (e.g., when diagnosed with a dread disease) or social status (e.g., when speaking out against injustice); yet he says that these varieties are merely analogous to the primary instance of courage on the battlefield. We’ll look at modern extensions of courage more fully in Chapter 6.

As to moderation, it was something of a catch-all term for all that the ancient Greeks held dear. Although Aristotle never says that we should pursue moderation in everything, he does think that moderation is crucial to human fulfillment. Among other considerations, courage is paradigmatically displayed in war, but we engage in war only for the sake of peace; thus we need to understand and practice the character traits that maintain peace, among which moderation plays a central role.

For Aristotle, the paradigm cases of moderation concern bodily pleasures that we have in common with other animals, especially those that involve the senses of taste or touch. We don't call someone immoderate or decadent if they have a passion for listening to music or viewing beautiful paintings, but we do if they are overly attached to eating, drinking, or sex. Similar reasoning applies to, say, a passion for honor or for learning; in such domains, the enjoyment is more mental than physical.

Moderation is intermediate between an admittedly rare insensitivity to bodily pleasures and an all-too-human tendency to indulge in them. We are naturally geared to seek pleasure, which is why leading a more moderate, temperate life is a positive achievement. That life consists in feeling and acting in ways that are consistent with societal norms, bodily health, reasonable expense, and the aim of living in a beautiful way.

By contrast, people who succumb to decadence essentially have a policy of greedily grabbing every pleasure that comes along (even if it’s worthless or ugly) and can be downright pained by a lack of constant titillation. As a result, they destroy the harmony that should exist between reason and desire; indeed, it could even be said that they lose their minds, since at root the Greek word for moderation means preserving your capacity to think and be minded in the right ways.

2.5 NOBILITY

In his biological works, Aristotle draws attention to similarities between certain human thrivings and the behavioral dispositions of other animals (e.g., the courage of hawks and the gentleness of elephants). Yet three character traits that he identifies as pertaining to the whole person seem to uniquely activate the noblest capacities of humankind: justice, free-heartedness, and greatness of soul.

For Aristotle, justice is a matter of distributing things according to worth. This is a highly general formula with many specific applications. The “things” could be money, honors, rights, privileges, social status, and so on. Similarly, the “worth” could be based on legal status, skill, character, goodness, knowledge, wisdom, and the like. For example, all other things being equal, in justice a flute should properly belong to someone with the skill to play it, rather than to someone who merely has the means to afford it.

In ancient Greece, worth was not only human but also divine. Doing justice to the gods took precedence over all other forms of justice, followed by justice to one’s country, one’s parents, one’s ancestors, and only then one’s compatriots and companions. (We’ll take a closer look at Aristotle’s views about piety and reverence for the gods in Chapter 5.)

One of the great challenges of human justice is determining worth, because scrupulous attention to the qualities of the persons involved is required, and these qualities are difficult to assess. This is especially so when one of the persons is yourself! Specific forms of injustice, such as greed and arrogance, entail a degree of self-deception, in which you erroneously believe that you deserve more than others. The requisite truthfulness and impartiality can be difficult to attain, but are crucial contributors to the preservation of a free society.

Aristotle, and the ancient Greeks more generally, did not think that freedom should imply complete license to do as one pleases; instead, the free-hearted individual is a person with a well-ordered soul whose inner harmony shine outward into harmonious relations with other people and the world at large. Free-hearted people are not only generous in our modern sense of charity, but also spend lavishly on necessities, delight in beauty, liberally express their love for family and friends and fellow citizens, and achieve admirable qualities of character like adaptability, kindness, compassion, goodwill, and mutual understanding.

Beyond the requirements of justice, free-hearted people accurately discern the worth of all things human and therefore put a premium on glorious pursuits like wisdom, learning, conversation, music, dancing, poetry, art, dramatic performances, religious festivals, athletic games, and all the other pastimes we humans pursue to enjoy and celebrate life itself. These are the activities of serious leisure and thus are more meaningful than seemingly significant but ultimately meaningless acquisitions like wealth, power, status, and fame. 

But what about honor, i.e., the esteem you receive from other people and your community? The ancient Greeks were keenly avid for honor and considered it to be the greatest of the external goods. In fact, the Aristotelian thriving of great-heartedness consists of exactly the ability to appropriately handle honor and dishonor, as well as good fortune and bad fortune.

Whereas conceited people think they should receive more honor than they deserve and small-hearted, overly humble people think they should receive less honor than they deserve, great-hearted people know themselves and truthfully perceive their own worth. However, a further qualification is needed, because the Greeks would not have considered someone great-hearted if they didn’t have a certain grandeur of personhood and ability in the first place. Thus Aristotle argues that the great-hearted individual needs to be a beautifully good human being of complete virtue who manifests all the thrivings of character and whose noble attitude suffuses all of their activities.

The great-hearted person takes goodness very seriously indeed and thus is contemptuous of rich, powerful people whose demand for honor is merely a kind of make-believe. This is also why the great-hearted person takes a measured stance to outward success and failure, recognizing that they are inconsequential in the grand scheme of human life. What matters is who you have become, not how you seem.

2.6 VIRTUOSITY

It feels like the beautifully good person has risen above merely being virtuous and has become something like a virtuoso of the human spirit. In fact, Aristotle likens the person who takes life seriously to the guitarist who takes music seriously: the goal of each is to complete their task well and beautifully, whether that is making music or being human.

Becoming a beautifully good person is a rarified aspiration, which perhaps few people ever consciously consider. To modern ears it might even sound somewhat presumptuous, but from the perspective of soulcraft it is certainly a more worthy goal than the all-too-common objectives of becoming rich, powerful, or famous.

Yet the path to virtuosity is far from straightforward. There are no rules for living at that lofty level, where success is more art than science.

We can see the limits of rule-based virtue in Aristotle’s account of justice as doing what the law enjoins. Eventually he concludes that because the law needs to keep things simple and can't cover all circumstances, it can address only what is true universally or for the most part. Yet, as Aristotle says repeatedly, the truest judgment always resides in perception of the particulars. Thus to really do justice, we need humaneness, which sets things straight and speaks more accurately in specific situations. Humaneness transforms things that are ill-defined under the law into things that are well-defined in action; thus it is the best form of justice, since it honors not the letter but the spirit of the law.

Perception of the particulars requires not just knowledge but insight, which is the task of wisdom as the intellectual thriving of thinking things through and deliberating well about your commitments and activities. We turn to that topic next.
