Complete Thyself: Chapter 3

CHAPTER 3: THINKING

3.1 WISDOM AS A THRIVING

As with the other thrivings, wisdom too finds a middle path, in this case between foolishness and cunning. The wise person combines the kind of beautifully good character we’ve just talked about with discerning judgment; by contrast, the foolish person falls short of wisdom by being of basically good character but exercising poor judgment, whereas the cunning person overshoots wisdom by making clever decisions but lacking the moral compass provided by having good character.

The wisdom that Aristotle has in mind isn’t the serene detachment of a sage or saint, but the active know-how portrayed for all time in the Homeric hero Odysseus. The wise person isn’t merely a good thinker, but someone who demonstrates their knowledge in action and in their long-term commitments.

Another ancient paragon of action-oriented wisdom was Pericles, the longtime leader of Athens at its height, who had a thorough understanding of what was good for himself and for human beings in general: it’s true that he did well individually, but he also helped the Athenians to flourish as a people.

Because practical know-how entails a significant degree of cleverness, it can easily shade over into mere cunning if unmoored from good character. Thus true wisdom is additive: your decision-making powers can’t be beautifully good if you lack the foundation of a beautifully good character.

What makes for good judgment? Aristotle approaches the question from two ends of the spectrum.

At its most immediate, good judgment requires excellent discernment of what’s feasible in the moment; this is an almost perceptual ability to identify the best course of action right now, often based more on experience than on knowledge or reasoning. Yet mere experience can take you only so far: the person who acts without deliberation and deeper insight might often be lucky in hitting the mark, but is liable to go astray in more challenging circumstances, or even succumb to unthinking convention.

At its most rarified, good judgment requires a comprehensive understanding of the best life for human beings. It is in terms of this that Socrates insisted his friends and fellow citizens should provide an account for their way of life. Following in the Socratic tradition passed on by his teacher Plato, Aristotle distinguishes between living as directed by the results of correct reasoning (quite possibly someone else’s reasoning or the laws of the land) and living in such a way that all of your activities are suffused with thoughtful reflection. Only in the latter case are you able to spell out why you live the way you do, which is a prerequisite for experiencing complete inner harmony and truly living with purpose.

3.2 A LIFE WORTH LIVING

Aristotle asks a question that must strike us as strange: what is the task or job or work of a human being? This is a variation on a question that was common among the ancient Greeks: if you were given the choice, why would you choose to have been born rather than not?

To answer these questions in modern terms, we would have to say: a person’s task is not merely to be successful in a particular line of work but to be successful as a human being, because only by finding true fulfillment can you craft a life that is preferable to the alternative of having never been born.

Although these stark statements might seem somewhat exaggerated, we can use them to trigger reflection into what makes life worth living. For Aristotle, at its best a life of true fulfillment meets the following criteria.

First, it’s complete unto itself: it’s not pursued for the sake of something else (say, health or wealth), but is prized for its own sake; indeed, good things such as health and wealth exist for and contribute to the more complete state of overall fulfillment.

Closely related is a second point: a life of fulfillment has a kind of wholeness, in that it lacks nothing of significance which would make a noticeable difference if missing (such as friends and community).

Third, it’s not what we call a grind or limited to satisfying the necessities. Instead, it’s organized around more free, beautiful, glorious activities such as festive meals, meaningful conversation, aesthetic appreciation, philosophical speculation, and loving relationships.

Fourth, it’s enjoyable, even blissful, because all of its characteristic activities have their own inherent pleasures.

It’s no coincidence that for the ancient Greeks these criteria applied first and foremost to the Homeric gods, who were everlastingly young, healthy, and gorgeous, didn’t have to concern themselves with earning a living, and could treat life as one endless celebration.

Humans, by comparison, had a sorry, short-lived lot (thus the wonder about whether it’s better not to have been born at all). Yet the Greeks thought that even we mortals can share in the divine and attain some measure of fulfillment by focusing on the higher things in life and on the activities that make life worth living. As Aristotle put it, we should strain every nerve to reach upward and, as much as possible, to live like the immortals.

This best life - not jostling for money, power, status, or fame - is our highest human purpose.

3.3 ADJUSTING YOUR AIM

That all sounds well and good in theory, but in practice how do we build such a life and pursue the highest good achievable in action?

Consider the months-long task of building a house. Here everything is done for the sake of the completed dwelling, and the architect or builder understands how and why each part and activity contributes to that overarching goal. Yet, comparatively speaking, building a house is a relatively simple affair. Completing the years-long task of crafting a life well lived is a much more complex and intricate endeavor, for there’s no set of architect’s plans to follow, the “materials” of life (our doings and feelings) aren’t standardized, most of us don’t have a clear idea of what our aspirations should be until we’re halfway through the construction process, and we’re continually issuing change orders to ourselves as the site shifts beneath our feet.

Even worse, many people go through life like the soulcraft equivalent of day-laborers, unaware that constructing a lifelong state of fulfillment is a worthy or feasible goal. And yet it is just that goal which functions as an organizing principle for your life, which bestows upon your day-to-day activities a sense of structure, a measure of meaning, the wonder of oneness, and even the grace of grandeur. Indeed, fulfillment is not a state that mus be delayed until the end of life, but is an ongoing enactment of your highest capacities and aspirations.

The challenge is transforming this lofty purpose into everyday action by closing the gap between wish and fact, intention and commitment, ideal and real. Aristotle has some powerful suggestions for doing so, which surprisingly enough come from his foundational studies of logic.

Step one is to consciously set the universal purpose of living the best life for human beings as your personal target in life, so that it functions as the underlying premise for all of your choices and decisions. After all, if you’re not aiming at the right target, you’ll never hit it! This analogy is serious business because in ancient Greece archery was not a mere hobby but a matter of life and death both in hunting and in the courageous defence of family, friends, and community.

For Aristotle, it is the beautiful goodness of your character that makes your target the right one. However, you also need to know how to hit the target in particular situations, which is the role of deliberation.

3.4 LIVING DELIBERATELY

One of the distinctive capacities of human beings is that we have a deep sense of the future, which can extend over your entire lifespan and beyond. From his extensive biological research, Aristotle recognizes that certain other animals have natural abilities analogous to human recollection, know-how, craft, comprehension, and intelligence. However, he thinks that only human beings live deliberately, i.e., engage in long-term deliberation, forethought, and planning. Thus if we are to succeed at being human, we need to take deliberation seriously.

The scope of deliberation depends on the timeframes and levels of abstraction involved. Deliberating about what to cook for dinner tonight differs from deliberating about how to eat more nutritiously in the coming year, which differs from deliberating about whether to pursue a career as a nutritionist, which differs yet again from deliberating about the relative importance of health and fitness in relation to other commitments such as personal relationships and earning a living. As these horizons widen, so too do the factors that come into play, up to and including your plans for your entire life and even for your descendents.

Fundamentally, deliberation is a kind of search or inquiry. Guided by an overall goal, you take counsel with yourself and narrow down your options to identify the activities and commitments that best enable you to make progress in the direction of your chosen target - which, ideally, is the best human life you can imagine.

Your doings and feelings can be seen as the raw material of your commitments, whereas your purpose is the shape you impart on that material, somewhat as a sculptor shapes clay into the beautiful form of a statue. The goal is to bring matter and form together into a unified experience of a life worth living.

Aristotle likens the process of deliberation to a logical proof: you start with the premise that you want to craft a life well lived and iteratively clarify or thicken that conception until a somewhat distant and vague ideal is transformed into a close up and clearly defined activity. When the conclusion of your deliberations becomes inseparable from and one with your chosen target, you see your purpose in your activity of the moment and you see your activity of the moment as an instantiation of your purpose. This simultaneous “seeing in” and “seeing as” is a practice of being minded in a special way. Not only do you imagine the possibility of a beautiful way of life, but you perceive the actuality of beautiful particulars in your projects, relationships, and other commitments.

We moderns are accustomed to thinking that a specific activity is merely a means to end. Aristotle, by contrast, enourages you understand that a specific activity simply is your purpose as enacted in this moment. Deliberation is how you bring your future into the present.

When your purpose is thereby transformed into commitment and then action, you experience psychic unity, inner harmony, and a seamless integration between your reflected past, your lived present, and your imagined future.

3.5 DEMONSTRATING COMMITMENT

A logical proof is often called a demonstration. A deliberative decision too is a demonstration: a practical demonstration that you understand how to live, which takes the form of making a commitment.

Commitments play a special role in soulcraft. A commitment is a state of readiness for action: a tensing of the bow, an active stance of the soul, a keen awareness of possibilities, an eagerness to act when the right moment presents itself. Your thrivings of character are defined not so much by your actions, but by this readiness to act, which is established by the traits you acquire through experience and reflection.

Indeed, even wisdom itself is a kind of readiness, which is why you don’t need to reflect and deliberate constantly, but only when the situation demands it. Under normal circumstances, your acquired traits give you the readiness you need to take action without necessarily stopping to think. You’d never get anything done if you had to plan out every task in detail before taking action!

Another powerful aspect of commitment is that when you truly instantiate the thrivings, you take action in such a steadfast way that you don’t lose your equilibrium if circumstances change and your plans no longer quite fit the situation - which they rarely do. Your commitment, which instantiates your purpose in the moment, guides your action to a successful consummation because it is flexible enough to adapt as needed.

Finally, commitment helps you maintain awareness in action. Many things can distract you from your chosen purpose in the moment: the temptation to indulge in seemingly more pleasant alternatives, the pains of doing what needs to be done, doubts about your skills and abilities, social pressure to act in a more conventional manner, the chatter in your head, and so on. Commitment helps you tune out these distractions so that your doings and feelings end up being consistent with your understanding of what it means to live in a beautiful way. This active awareness is a key aspect of living a life that is suffused with wisdom.

3.6 BEAUTY IN ACTION

As we’ve seen repeatedly, living is activity. It’s one thing to have developed a beautifully good character, but that’s a set of traits, which you can possess even when you’re asleep. What matters most is applying your character in beautiful actions.

In his writings on the arts and more generally, Aristotle identifies half a dozen key principles of beauty: unity, coherence, proportion, order, grandeur, and significance.

To see how these are relevant in practice, consider a situation in which a good friend of yours is considering a divorce and could use several forms of short-term assistance, including moral support, informal legal advice, financial help, and a hand with moving some items into storage.

Unity captures an almost aesthetic sense that nothing is missing and that superfluous aspects are appropriately excluded. You don’t want to overlook your friend’s particular needs in her difficult situation, but that doesn't necessarily mean you should also send her a goofy gift card every week (unless you know she likes that kind of thing).

Coherence entails making sure that all the aspects of your assistance are well arranged and fit together well, with the result that they are internally consistent and mutually reinforcing. For instance, you wouldn’t suggest working with both a couples counselor and a divorce lawyer simultaneously, but you will try to structure your activities over time in the most supportive way. 

Proportion means seeing to it that your actions correspond to your friend's need, such that they neither fall short nor overshoot. Perhaps she could use a temporary loan of $1,000 to pay some emergency expenses, in which case it isn't proportionate to lend her $100 or $10,000, even if you could afford to do so. Your actions should also be proportionate to your own capacities (perhaps you don't know anything about the legal issues but you can introduce her to a lawyer friend of yours)

Order is, to put it negatively, a lack of chaos; in a more positive sense it implies that all of your activities are ordered toward your overall purpose, in this case of giving care to your friend. Thus order might imply that you are steadfast in your assistance, that your emotional tone is unswervingly kind and supportive throughout your interactions, and so on.

Grandeur might sound grandiose, but it’s a matter of magnitude: guaranteeing that your actions reflect how important this friendship is to you both as a long-term shared project of mutual fulfillment.

Seriousness indicates that you treat your actions as matters of significance, such that you act in a way that is worthy of respect and deeply meaningful to you and your friend.

Notice that some of these aspects of beauty might overlap. As always, Aristotle wasn’t trying to generate an exhaustive taxonomy of rules to follow (even if he was interpreted that way thousands of years later), but to understand how these various aspects contribute to beautiful actions and a beautiful life.

Also notice that a complex situation like this might call forth multiple thrivings: generosity, mildness, patience, kindness, courage, and perhaps a few more. Interestingly, in Aristotle’s books on soulcraft after he discusses wisdom he drops any mention of the individual thrivings; it’s almost as if once you have developed complete practical wisdom all the other thrivings simply fall into place. In fact, as we’re about to see that we can reach the same conclusion through our consideration of caring relationships in all their forms.
