Complete Thyself: Chapter 4

CHAPTER 4: LOVING

“One word alone frees us from all miseries: loving.” - Sophocles, Oedipus at Colonus, 1615-1617

4.1 TAKING RELATIONSHIPS SERIOUSLY

One of Aristotle’s most famous observations is that human beings are political animals. This doesn’t mean we’re all latent activists who enjoy nothing more than going door-to-door to get out the vote for city council candidates. Instead, it means that we are made for living with other people in a community whose goal is to cultivate the fulfillment of all its members. Nothing brings as much joy as sharing the activities of life with those who are dear to us; once we know this, we realize that love, friendship, and fellowship suffuse all of our interactions, our every moment, indeed our entire way of life. Sociality is fundamental to human nature.

Humans are not the only “political animals.” In his biological writings, Aristotle manifests a fascination with the social qualities of cranes, ants, wasps, and especially bees, which he says have something divine about them. However, humans are social not in the indiscriminate way that, say, bees are. By contrast, we are selectively social: by choice we form bonds with, make commitments to, and cultivate intimate fellowship with particular people who evoke in us a feeling of inherent kinship. This is especially true of close, lifelong pairings of the sort celebrated among the ancient Greeks, such as Achilles and Patroclus in the Iliad, Odysseus and Penelope in the Odyssey, and Orestes and Pylades in the Oresteia plays of Aeschylus. Even among genetic kin, humans might not feel an equal sense of kinship, since a mother might demonstrate a preference for one child over another, or you might have a favorite sister or brother or cousin.

Similarly, you can’t be friends with everyone. In fact, you can be especially close to only a few people in your lifetime. That’s part of what can make a lasting marriage or an intimate friendship such a beautiful experience.

One reason for the selectivity of human relationships is that love or friendship is not really a so-called “external good” like wealth or power (after all, one dollar is interchangeable with another, and there’s no natural limit to how many dollars you might accumulate). Instead, a relationship is more like a shared project, which requires significant time, care, and intimacy to blossom through likeminded commitment, reciprocal recognition, common goals, cooperative activity, and mutual attention. You have the capacity to cultivate only a few such relationships, which is why they have great mutual meaning and deep internal significance - and why they deserve serious attention from anyone who seeks to live a life of fulfillment.

4.2 FORMS OF LOVING

Following ancient Greek usage, Aristotle employs the same word (philia) for loving relationships among family members, for chosen friendships, for fellowship among clubmates or shipmates, and for brotherhood among fellow citizens. Scholars and translators usually use the word friendship to describe them all, but given that Aristotle considers a mother’s love for her children to be the originating sense of the term, from here on I’ll call them all forms of love.

Aristotle perceives three primary foundations for human relationships: enjoyment, usefulness, and character.

Relationships based on enjoyment, which he observes are especially prevalent among the young, might include your acquaintanceship with your drinking buddies or a loose group of friends who go to concerts together. Such relationships tend to be relatively shallow and short-lived as your interests change, someone in your friends group starts to get on your nerves, or you move away and lose touch with people who were merely convenient, not meaningful.

Relationships based on usefulness become more prominent as you begin to make your way in the world: your hairdresser, your co-worker in the marketing department, the neighbor who checks in on your cat while you’re out of town, and so on. Such relationships are relatively transactional and mutable, since what you find useful can change with the circumstances (e.g., you move across the country and now have new neighbors), with the stages of life (e.g. you retire and your former co-workers go on without you), and with the different roles you play (e.g., you get promoted and now you’re managing your old friends).

By contrast, relationships based on character are more stable, long-lasting, and beautiful. Unlike pleasure and advantage, acquired traits of character are relatively immutable - a kind of second nature. In a character relationship, someone is dear to you because of who they are, not only because they’re fun to be around or can help you out in times of need; they probably have those qualities, too, but such benefits are not the primary basis for the relationship.

In this sense, Aristotle says that a character relationship is complete: it has an inherent goodness about it but is also enjoyable and useful, whereas the other two kinds of relationship are incomplete since they are either only enjoyable or only useful.

The goodness of a character relationship derives in large measure from the centrality of mutual, reciprocal caring, in which you care about the other person for their own sake and for who they really are, and the other person treats you the same. In a relationship of enjoyment what matters most is experiencing the pleasure rather than sharing in an activity for its own sake; similarly, in a relationship of usefulness what matters most is gaining something beneficial or advantageous. Aristotle doesn’t say that these more shallow goals are bad - we all need useful assistance and want pleasant experiences - but they aren’t fundamental. This is why people who take life seriously seek out relationships based on character.

At the same time, it’s not as if you’ll form relationships with every person of excellent character. As noted, we humans are highly selective about our commitments to other people. There are plenty of good people in the world; someone who is dear to you is not only good plain and simple, but good to you and for you and by your own lights, in ways that often feel mysterious or intuitive.

Because human relationships are matters of such high complexity, further wrinkles can be the cause of much heartache. Expectations can differ (e.g., you might think a character friendship is forming with a colleague, whereas the other person is just using you to get ahead). People can change (e.g., the friend you thought you knew goes into a relentless downward spiral of drug abuse). Inequalities can distort the relationship (e.g., someone who seems to be friendly toward you might only be flattering you, thus yielding only a semblance of friendship).

One additional consideration is worth noting, since Aristotle seems to have demonstrated scant awareness of it: the role of power, expecially in family dynamics. Aristotle likens the relationship between father and son (no mention of daughters) to the relationship between a king and his subjects, likens the relationship between husband and wife to the relationship between an aristocrat and his inferiors, and even likens the relationship between the master and the household servants to the relationship between a craftsman and his inanimate tools! These analogies are unfortunate because they indicate that Aristotle was oblivious to some of the deformations inherent in ancient Greek society. However, it might be sensible to take them with a grain of salt, for in his own will and testament he exercised great care over his wife and daughter, and also made provisions for freeing the family’s servants.

4.3 LOVING AS AN ACTIVITY

In present-day civilization, which has inherited so much from medieval troubadours and romanticist poets, we typically think of love as a feeling. By contrast, Aristotle holds that loving is primarily an activity. It is not enough, he says, to have warm, positive feelings toward another person and to wish them well: you need to act on those feelings and wishes.

Furthermore, the activity of loving is better than being loved or receiving admiration and esteem, for these experiences are relatively passive (even inanimate things can be loved) and they don’t involve activity - whereas living simply is activity, as Aristotle emphasizes repeatedly. In a way, we could even say that you are more alive when loving than when being loved. An extreme case is the famous star who’s adored from afar by legions of fans; here the relationship, if we can even call it that, exists in one direction only and thus can warp the souls of fan and star alike.

What’s lacking in such a “relationship” is reciprocity or, even better, mutuality. In the incomplete relationships based on pleasure or use, there is a kind of quid pro quo (“you scratch my back and I’ll scratch yours”), but it’s strictly limited by the nature of the relationship. As a result, any activity that the parties pursue has some external goal: the pleasure or the use. In a complete relationship based on character, the activities are ends in themselves and the mutual caring and attention you and your loved one exchange are limited only by the amount of time you can spend together and the intimacy you can develop.

This is why Aristotle focuses so intensively on shared living as the soil in which a character friendship can bloom. In Greek, he marshals a whole army of words prefixed with “syn-“ or “sym-“ (meaning “with”), such as the root for our word sympathy (which we could accurately but awkwardly render as “with-feeling”). The particular activities entailed in “with-living” might depend on your conception of the best way of life, but they likely include with-doing, with-feeling, with-joying, with-sorrowing, with-grieving, with-gathering, with-eating, with-drinking, with-bonding, with-pairing, with-playing, with-talking, with-seeing, with-knowing, and in the end simply with-being. Indeed, in relationships of character sharing a way of life consists of collaborating on the core tasks identified by the chapter titles of this book: living, thriving, minding, loving, knowing, being.

All of these activities have their own inherent pleasures, which are further magnified when you engage in them with those who are dear to you, as you plan them out together, enact them together, talk about them together, and savor them together. Moreover, these activities are especially meaningful because they activate and express fundamental human capacities such as our ability to understand the world around us and to care for the people who matter to us. Thus shared living can be a glorious celebration of what it means to be human; this is especially so for beautifully good people who take life seriously.

4.4 EXCELLENCE IN RELATIONSHIPS

Because the complete kind of relationship is based on character and because character is composed of stable practices of doing and feeling, it’s no surprise that Aristotle thinks the activity of loving is suffused with the excellences, or even that loving is an excellence unto itself.

The ancient Greeks lived in relatively small, traditional communities, so their way of life was more intensely social than ours. Courage came to the fore in fighting alongside kinsmen, friends, and neighbors to defend the community. Moderation and gentleness reinforced harmony within extended families. Freehearted generosity discouraged the destructive development of envy. Justice - doing right in accordance with public law and social custom - was critical to maintaining social cohesion.

Perhaps even more important than legislated justice is the doing right that happens in private within our personal relationships. Whereas public justice is defined by the community, private justice is up to us and thus is even more closely connected with character. It is here that the excellence of humane wisdom plays such a significant role in cultivating relationships of love, friendship, and brotherhood, since it fills the gaps left by legislation. Along with good character within yourself and good will toward others, this kind of good judgment is one of the three pillars upon which interpersonal trust is built.

Another contribution of character excellences is that they help you manage the pleasures and pains of human relationships. For instance, great-heartedness gives you the perspective to not become crestfallen when things go poorly or become overjoyed when things go well, which helps you keep your equilibrium since relationships are one of the prime sources of troubles and delights in human life.

Furthermore, the paradigmatic, complete type of relationship is founded not merely in a feeling but in a mutual commitment to the good and to each other, rooted in stable traits of character. Here the activity of loving is itself a kind of excellence because those who love each other collaborate in making things go well, doing good works, and taking beautiful actions for their own sake, not in order to be repaid in kind.

At this highest level, loving is an outlet for the overflowing excellence of beautifully good people who take life seriously. Thus, perhaps paradoxically, it is fulfilled, seemingly independent people who can truly enact the beautiful practices of interdependent loving and giving, for they come to love and friendship not out of need but from a surplus of good character, good will, and good judgment.

4.5 LOVE AND WHOLENESS

Another of Aristotle’s most famous observations is that a friend is another self. Modern-day narcissists might be pleased to hear this, for what could be better than adding another me to the world?

Yet the sense of Aristotle’s phrase is not quite so self-centered, since it derives from parenting and biological reproduction, especially from a mother’s love for her child, who is quite literally the flesh of her flesh.

Indeed, Aristotle maintains that your life cannot be complete if you live all by yourself: you need parents, children, spouse, friends, and fellow citizens to make your life whole. Thus relationships are a key source of wholeness and self-completion. The activity of loving is not a merely external good but dwells inside you and thus transforms you into a better person; likewise, the integration of the pleasant, the useful, and the good in a complete relationship supports internal harmony and helps you steer clear of the kind of self-indulgence that comes about when pleasures override commitments.

As to the importance of sociality in human life, consider again Aristotle’s formulation that human beings are made for living in a community. The ancient Athenian ideal was an active democracy in which the people themselves took turns at statecraft in pursuit of the common good: sometimes you would lead, sometimes you would follow, but you would never submissively serve an absolute monarch or a faceless empire. Yet this model had its limits; as we would say nowadays, it couldn’t scale, and much beyond ten thousand citizens it started to break down (even the Athenians, who were political geniuses, at their height had a city-state of perhaps fifty thousand citizens).

More critically, Aristotle observes that civic friendships are based on being useful to each other in the community; however, as we’ve seen, a relationship based solely on usefulness is incomplete. Even if the citizens of a small community could settle on a shared way of life through free discussion and mutual legislation, their bonds of brotherhood could never aspire to the beautiful heights of human “with-living” because that’s not what politics makes possible.

It is at those heights where pursuing a shared way of life has additional powers to generate self-knowledge. The likeminded pursuit of the best life with other people requires joint deliberation, collaborative articulation of shared ideals, and a practice of speaking freely and setting each other straight in search of mutual improvement. Although in a small community these practices are barely possible (albeit in a tenuous form), they are more fully activated in close personal relationships based on character. In such a relationship, you come to know both self and other, as does the person who is dear to you. This knowledge is not something separate from living but deeply integrated into your way of life, suffusing your doings and feelings with awareness and attention. As Aristotle puts it, living is a kind of knowing, which is why fulfillment extends as far as awareness and attention do.

4.6 THE CARE OF THE SOUL

The question naturally arises: are you your own best friend and should you love yourself?

Aristotle’s short answer is: it’s complicated.

His long answer is itself a complex argument spanning several dense pages of crabbed Greek. Thus the best way to approach the topic might be to step back and seek insight through Aristotle’s philosophical predecessors, Socrates and Plato.

In Plato’s dialogue the Apology, Socrates defends his way of life before the Athenian jury that ultimately sentences him to death. His small-minded accusers stipulate that he should be required to cease and desist from his annoying practice of philosophizing, which for Socrates took the form of buzzing about the marketplace quizzing and cajoling his fellow citizens to care less about making money and instead to prize nothing more than taking care of their souls.

This idea of caring for the soul provides the ultimate ground for much of what we read in the works of Plato and Aristotle, so it’s important to unpack it. Here are some alternative formulations: cultivating personhood; achieving a unified self; attaining harmonious integration among your thoughts, yearnings, and feelings; educating your desires to align with your ideal of the best life for human beings; transforming what is good plain and simple into what you consider good for yourself; engaging in the lifelong task of soulcraft.

Aristotle, who came from a long line of doctors on both sides of his family, uses a medical analogy. You can’t become a beautifully good person, he says, without taking beautifully good actions and cultivating beautifully good feelings in the way that beautifully good people do. But most of those interested in philosophy don’t do this; instead they somehow expect that they’ll be seen as taking life seriously if they merely talk and argue about the nature of the good. Such people are like medical patients who put on a show of carefully listening to their doctor but don’t actually follow the doctor’s advice. Just as such people won’t put their body in great shape if they treat themselves that way, so you won’t put your soul in great shape if you don’t apply the philosophical treatment of thoroughly loving wisdom in practice.

There’s no shortcut to soulcraft, nor to being a true friend to yourself, nor to self-love in the genuine sense of the word. The only path to achieving your higher self goes through the difficult terrain of self-mastery. If you aspire to being character friends with yourself, you need to develop a beautifully good character in the first place.

Thus Aristotle distinguishes two senses of self-love: loving yourself no matter who and what you happen to be, and loving yourself because you are in fact loveable: because you’ve done the hard work of cultivating your character and becoming a beautifully good person. Genuine love of self is love of the good and the beautiful as they are manifested in your own personhood.

However, it is exceedingly difficult to really know if you are a beautifully good person, because the easiest thing in the world is self-deception. Although the honesty of intimate relationships can help, there’s no escaping the fact that it is hard to engage in truthful self-assessment and achieve trustworthy self-knowledge.

In the next two chapters we’ll explore even further the extent to which the search for self-knowledge and self-completion is a lifelong task.
