Complete Thyself: Preface

Inscribed at the entrance to the temple of Apollo at Delphi were two maxims that the ancient Greeks revered: γνῶθι σαυτόν ("Know Thyself") and μηδὲν ἄγαν ("Nothing To Excess"). Even today, 2500 years later, we recognize that there is great wisdom in these sayings. Yet it is no easier for us than it was for the ancients to truly understand and live by that wisdom.

Aristotle, one of the greatest minds of ancient Greece and indeed all human history, grappled deeply with the question of how to live - so much so that Dante called him “the master of those who know.” Not only are the truths that Aristotle found beautifully compelling but, suitably adapted to modern circumstances, they can help us live the best life possible today.

His fundamental insight is that the only way to really know thyself is to complete thyself: to fully develop and activate your capacities as a human being, foremost among them your yearning to understand the world you live in and to take beautifully right action in your initiatives and relationships. At root, his vast writings are an unfolding and elucidation of this truth.

Yet although Aristotle can still help us find happiness and fulfillment, he is not a cuddly self-help author handing out happiness hacks: his thinking can be deep, heavy, difficult, and hard to decipher. Scholars endlessly debate his writings, but rarely do they relate his insights to the great task of becoming a better, wiser person.

Indeed, when I was a budding student of ancient philosophy at Columbia University, one of my mentors said to me: "It doesn't matter what's true, it matters what you can get published." That was excellent career advice, because it led me to abandon academia in favor of a successful career as a technologist. However, it was lousy philosophy, because nothing matters more than the truths that set us free to be, not merely highly accomplished in our careers, but highly accomplished as human beings.

This is the promise of what Socrates called the examined life, and it is a promise that Aristotle's philosophy fulfills in spades, if only we can come to understand it.

However, understanding Aristotle isn't always easy. Ideally but impossibly we'd have a long, deep conversation with Aristotle himself about human fulfillment! Second best would be to read a written dialogue that emulates such a conversation; Aristotle wrote a few of those, but unfortunately only fragments survived the collapse of classical civilization. Third best is to trace the dialectical flow of his formal writings on the highest good attainable by human beings, with an eye to what I call soulcraft; that’s what I do here in concentrated meditations that reward slow reading and sustained reflection.

Although there are countless scholarly books and papers about Aristotle (I've read hundreds of them), the vast majority are produced by professors who must focus on what they can get published by academic presses and journals. By contrast, my focus is on actionable truth and how to live. The interpretations I set forth, while sometimes unconventional, are grounded in philosophical scholarship and my own lifelong encounter with Aristotle. Above all I strive to show how Aristotle's insights can be applied to the real world we live in today.

Let's get started!
