Topics
Aristotle
tr. W.A. Pickard-Cambridge

"An accident is something which, thought it is none of the foregoing - i.e., neither a definition nor a property nor a genus - yet belongs to the thing; and something which may either belong or not belong to any one and the self-same thing.... To accident are to be attached also all comparisons of things together, when expressed in language that is derived in any kind of way from accident; such as, for example, the question, 'Is the honourable or the expedient preferable?' and 'Is the life of virtue or the life of self-indulgence [άπὀλαυσις] pleasanter?', and any other problem which may happen to be phrased in terms like these." (102b4-19)

"A dialectical problem is a subject of inquiry that contributes either to choice [αιρεσις] and avoidance, or to truth and knowledge [γνωσις], and does that either by itself, or as a help to the solution of some other such problem. It must, moreover, be something which either people hold no opinion either way, or most people hold a contrary opinon to the wise, or the wise to most people, or each of them among themselves. For some problems it is useful to know only with a view to choice and avoidance, e.g. whether pleasure is to be chosen or not, while some it is useful to know merely with a view to knowledge, e.g. whether the universe is eternal or not; others, again, are not useful in themselves for either of these purposes, but yet help us in regard to some such problems; for there are many things which we do not wish to know in themselves, but for the sake of other things, in order that through them we may come to know something else." (104b1-12)

"Moreover, see if one use of a term has a contrary, while another has absolutely non; e.g. the pleasure of drinking has a contrary in the pain of thirst, whereas the pleasure of seeing that the diagonal is incommensurate with the side has none, so that pleasure is used in more than one way. To love [φιλεῖν] also, used of the frame of mind [διἀνοια], has to hate as its contrary, while as used of the physical activity [σωματικὴ ἐνέργεια] it has none; clearly, therefore, to love is homonymous." (106a36-b4)

"Look also at the classes of the predicates signified by the term, and see if they are the same in all cases. For if they are not the same, then clearly the term is homonymous: e.g. good in the case of food is what is productive of pleasure, and in the case of medicine what is productive of health, whereas as applied to the soul it is to be of a certain quality, e.g. temperate or courageous or just; and likewise also, as applied to a man. Sometimes it signifies what happens at a certain time, as (e.g.) what happens at the right time; for what happens at the right time is called good. Often it signifies what is of a certain quantity, e.g. as applied to the proper amount; for the proper too is called good. So then good is homonymous." (107a2-12)

"Often in the actual accounts [λὀγοι] as well homonymy creeps in without being noticed, and for this reason the accounts also should be examined. If (e.g.) any one describes what betokens and produces health as being in a balanced state [τὸ συμμἐτρως ἔχον], we must not desist but go on to examine in what sense he has used the term 'balanced' in each case, e.g. if in the latter case it means that it is of the right amount to produce health, whereas in the former it means that it is such as to betoken what kind of state [ἕχις] prevails." (107b6-12)

"[T]he man whose star [δαίμων] is good [σπουδαῖος] is well-starred [εὐδαἰμον] - as Xenocrates says, he who has a noble soul [ψυχὴν ἔχοντα σπουδαἰαν] is well-starred. For a man's star is his soul." (112a36-38)

"If the addition of one thing to another makes that other good or white, whereas formerly it was not white or good, then the thing added will be white or good - it will possess the character it imparts to the whole as well. Moreover, if an addition of something to a given object intensifies the character which it had, then the thing added will itself as well be of that character." (115a26-31) [PSA: here "intensifies" is literally "makes it more like what it is" (mallon poiei toiouton hoion); this sounds like what hedeone does to an energeia.]

"The question which is the more desirable [hairetoteron], or the better [beltion], of two or more things, should be examined upon the following lines... First, then, that which is more lasting or secure is more desirable than that which is less so; and so is that which is more likely to be chosen by the prudent [phronimos] or by the good man [agathos aner] or by the right law [nomos orthos], or by men who are good [spoudaios] in any particular line, when they make their choice as such; i.e. either whatever most of them or what all of them would choose; e.g. in medicine (or in carpentry) those things are more desirable which most, or all, doctors would choose; or, in general, whatever most men or all men of all things would choose, e.g. the good; for everything aims at the good. In the second place, that which is essentially so is more desirable than that which does not come under the genus - e.g. justice than a just man; for the former falls within the genus, whereas the other does not, and the former is essentially good, whereas the latter is not.... Also, that which is desired for itself is more desirable than that which is desired for something else; e.g. health is more desirable than gymnastics; for the former is desired for itself, the latter for something else.... Also, that which is itself the cause of good is more desirable than what is so per accidens, e.g. virtue than luck (for the former is in itself, and teh latter per accidens, the cause of good things).... Also, what is good absolutely is more desirable than what is good for a particular person, e.g. recovery of health than a surgical operation.... So too what is good by nature is more desirable than the good that is not so by nature, e.g. justice than the just man; for the one is good by nature, whereas in the other case the goodness is acquired. Also the attribute is more desirable which belongs to the better and more honourable subject, e.g. to a god rather than to a man, and to the soul rather than to the body.... Also that is better which is inherent in things better or prior or more honourable: thus (e.g.) health is better than strength and beauty.... Also the end is benerally supposed to be more desirable than the means, and of two means, that which lies nearer the end. In general, too, a means directed toward the end of life is more desirable than a means to anything else, e.g. that which contributes to happiness than that which contributes to prudence.... Moreover, what is in itself nobler and more precious and praiseworthy is more desirable, e.g. friendship than wealth, and justice than strength. For the former belong in themselves to the class of things precious and praiseworthy, while the latter do so not in themselves but for something else; for no one prizes wealth for itself but always for something else, whereas we prize friendship for itself, even though nothing else is likely to come to us from it." (116a1-117a4)

"Also, everything is more desirable at the season when it is of greater consequence; e.g. freedom from pain in old age more than in youth; for it is of greater consequence in old age. On the same principle also, prudence is more desirable in old age; for no man chooses the young as leaders, because he does not expect them to be prudent. With courage, the converse is the case, for it is in youth that the active exercise of courage is more imperatively required. Likewise also with temperance; for the youn are more troubled by their passions than are their elders. Also, that is more desirable which is more useful at every season or at most seasons, e.g. justice and temperance rather than courage; fo rthey are always useful, while courage is only useful at times." (117a25-36)

"Moreover, things which our friends can share are more desirable than those they cannot. Also, things which we like rather to do to a friend a more desirable than those we like to do to anyone, e.g. just dealing and the doing of good rather than the semblance of them; for we would rather really do good to our friends than seem to do so, whereas towards anyone the converse is the case. Also, superfluities [periousiai] are better than necessities, and are sometimes more desirable as well; for the good life is better than mere life, and good life is a superfluity, whereas mere life itself is a necessity. Soemtimes, though, what is better is not also more desirable; for there is no necessity that because it is better it should also be more desirable: at least to be a philosopher is better than to make money, but it is not more desirable for a man who lacks the necessities of life. There is superfluity whenever a man possesses the necessities of life and sets to work to secure as well other noble acquisitions. Roughly speaking, perhaps, necessities are more desirable, while superfluities are better." (118a1-15)

"Again, that is more desirable which serves the better purpose, e.g. that which serves to promote virtue more than that which serves to promote pleasure. Likewise also in the case of objectionable things; for that is more objectionable which stands more in the way of what is desirable, e.g. disease more than ugliness; for disease is a greater hindrance both to pleasure and to being good." (118b32-37) [PSA: note the connection to being impeded from engaging in good activity.]

WIP
