Politics
Aristotle
tr. Joe Sachs

[these notes are a work in progress]

"For that which has the power to foresee by thinking [τῇ διανοίᾳ προορᾶν] is naturally ruling [ἄρχον] and naturally mastering [δεσπόζον], but what has the power to carry out those things with the body is ruled and is naturally slavish; hence the same thing is advantageous to a master and to a slave. And by nature, the female and the slave are distinct. (For nature does nothing stintingly, the way the bronze-workers make the Delphic knife, but one thing for one job, since in that way, by serving not for many jobs but for one, each of the instruments accomplishes its work in the most beautiful manner.)" (1252a31-1252b5)

"The complete association [κοινωνία τελείος] made of more than one village is a city, since at that point, so to speak, it gets to the threshold of full self-sufficiency [αὐταρκεία], coming into being for the sake of living, but being for the sake of living well. Hence every city is by nature, if in fact the first forms of association are as well. For it is their end [τέλος], and nature is an end; for what each thing is when it has reached the completion of its coming into being is that which we say is the nature of each, as with a human being, a horse, a house. And that for the sake of which, the end, is also what is best, and self-sufficiency is both an end and what is best." (1252b27-1253a1)

"A city is more primary by nature than a household, and more primary than each one of us, for the whole is necessarily more primary than its parts. For if the whole is done away with, there will not be a foot or a hand, except in an ambiguous sense, as if one were to speak of a hand made of stone (for once it has been disabled it will be like that); but all things are defined by their work and their potency, so when they are no longer of the sort defined they cannot be called the same things except ambiguously. So it is clea both that the city is by nature and that it is more primary than each person, for if each person is not self-sufficient when separate, he will be in a condition similar to that of other parts in relation to the whole, and one who is no part of a city, either from lacking the power to be in an association or from needing nothing [μηδὲν δεόμενος] on account of self-sufficiency, is that that reason either a beast or a god." (1253a18-29)

"For just as a human being in a state of completeness [τελεωθείς] is the best of all animals, so too, one who is separated from law and a judicial process is the worst of them all. For injustice is the most severe when it has weapons, and a human being is born having weapons for good judgment and virtue which are capable of being used to their utmost for their opposites." (1253a31-35) [PSA: the opposites of phronesis and arete are panourgia and mochtheria]

"For in cases in which anything is organized out of a number of things, whether continuous or separated, and becomes some one thing in common, something that rules and something that is ruled become apparent in them all, and this carries over from nature as a whole into beings with souls." (1254a28-32) [PSA: this hints at an analogy between the organization of the city and the organization of the human soul]

With regard to household management, Aristotle says: "for all those who have the opportunity [ἐξουσία = liberty] to avoid being bothered with it themselves, a manager takes on that office, while they devote themselves to political or philosophic activity." (1255b35-37)

"So one form of natural skill at acquisition [κτητικῆς] is a part of household management, because it either needs to have available or provide a means to make available a supply of possessions necessary for life [ζωή] and useful for association [κοινωνία] in a city or household. And it seems that true wealth, at any rate, it made up of those things. For self-sufficiency in this sort of property for a good life [πρὸς ἀγαθὴν ζωήν] is not unlimited the way Solon claims in the verse 'no upper limit of wealth is laid down in the sight of men.'" (1256b26-34)

WIP
