Physics
Aristotle
tr. Joe Sachs

"[W]hite comes into being from what is not white, and not from every non-white thing but from the black or what is in-between [metaxu], and educated from what is not educated, though not from every such thing but from the uneducated, or from something between the two if there is any. Nor is a thing transformed by destruction [phtheiretai] into the first chance thing, the white, say, into the educated, except when it happens incidentally, but the white is transformed by description into the non-white, and not into a random non-white thing but into something black or in-between, and in the same way the educated is transformed by destruction into the not-educated, and not into a random one but into the unedeucated, or something between the two if there is any." (188a37-188b8) [PSA: similarly with character traits.]

"For the nature that persists is a co-cause with the form of the things that come into being, like a mother, while the other portion of the opposition might often be slandered as not being at all by one who fixes his thinking sternly upon it as upon a criminal. But since there is something divine and good and sovereign [ephetos], we say that there is something opposite to it, and something else which inherently [pephuken] yearns for and stretches out toward it [ephiesthai kai oregesthai] it by its own nature. For them, it follows that the contrary yearns for its own destruction [phthoras]. However, it is not possible either for the form to long for itself, since it is not defective, or for its contrary to long for it (since contraries are destructive of one another), but it is the material that does this...." (192a13-22)

"Of the things that are, some are by nature, others through other causes; by nature are animals and their parts, plants, and the simple bodies, such as earth, fire, air, and water ... and all of them obviously differ from the things not put together by nature. For each of these has in itself a source [arche] of motion and rest, either in place, or by growth and shrinkage, or by alteration; but a bed or a cloak, or any other such kind of thing there is, in the respect in which it has happened upon each designation and to the extent that is is from art [techne], has no innate impulse of change at all." (192b8-19)

"This form or look is nature more than the material is. For each thing is meant when it is fully at work [entelecheiai], more than when it is potentially [dunamei]." (193b6-8)

"Further, that for the sake of which, or the end, as well as whatever is for the sake of these, belong to the same study. But nature is an end and a that-for-the-sake-of-which. (For of those things of which there is an end, if the motion is continuous, the end is both the last stage and that for the sake of which; which induced the poet to say, absurdly, "He has his death, for the sake of which he was born." For not every last thing professes itself to be an end, but only what is best [beltiston].) And the arts make even their material, some simply and others working it up, and we make use of everything there is as though it is for our sake (for we are also in some way an end, and "that for the sake of which" is double in meaning, but this is discussed in the writings on philosophy)." (194a27-36)

"[T]he maker [is a cause] as that from which the source of change or rest is, but other things are causes as the end or the good of the remaining ones. For that-for-the-sake-of-which means to be the best thing and the end of the other things, and let it make no difference to say the good itself or the apparent good." (195a23-26)

"Of things that happen, some happen for the sake of something and some not (and of the former, some in accordance with choice [kata prohairesin], some not in accordance with choice, but both are among things for the sake of something), so that it is clear that even among things apart from what is necessary or for the most part, there are some to which it is possible that being for the sake of something belongs. And for the sake of something are as many things as are brought about from thinking [dianoia] or from nature." (196b17-22)

Chance and fortune "differ because chance is more extensive, for everything from fortune is from chance, but not everything from it is from fortune. For fortune and what comes from fortune are present to beings to whom being fortunate, or generally, action [praxis], might belong. For this reason also, fortune is necessarily concerned with actions. (A sign is that good fortune seems to be either the same thing as happiness [eudaimonia] or nearly so, while happiness is a kind of action, namely doing well [eupraxia].) So whatever cannot act cannot do anything as a result of fortune either. And for this reason no inanimate thing nor any animal or small child can do anything as a result of fortune, because they do not have the power to choose in advance [ouk echei prohairesin]." (197a36-197b8)

"[A]rt in come cases completes [epitelei] what nature is unable to finish off, but in others imitates nature. If then, what comes from art is for the sake of something, it is clear that what comes from nature is too, for the series of things from art and from nature are alike, each to each, in the way that the later things are related to the earlier. This is clear most of all in the other animals, which do nothing by art, inquiry, or deliberation; for which reason some people are completely at a loss whether it is by intelligence or in some other way that spiders, ants, and such things work. But if we move forward little by little in this way, it becomes apparent that even in plants what is brought together comes about in relation to the end, as the leaves for the protection of the fruit. So if both by nature and for the sake of something a swallow makes a nest and the spider a web, and the plants make their leaves for the sake of the fruit, and their roots not upward but downward for the sake of nourishment, it is clear that there is such a cause in things that come into being and are by nature. And since nature is twofold, both material and form, and the latter is an end but the former is for the sake of an end, the form would be the cause for the sake of which. Now missing the mark happens even among things done according to art ... so it is clear that this is possible also among things done by nature. But if there are some things according ot art in which what is done correctly is for the sake of something that is attempted but missed, it is the same among natural things." (199a15-199b4)

"[B]y nature are as many things as, moved continuously by some source in themselves, reach some end; from each beginning does not come the same end for them all, nor just what chances, but each always reaches the same end unless something interferes." (199b15-18)

"It is absurd to think that a thing does not happen for the sake of something if we do not see what sets it in motion deliberating. Surely even art does not deliberate. If shipbuilding were present in wood, it would act in the same way as nature does, so if being for the sake of something is present in art, it is also present in nature. This is most clear when someone practices medicine himself on himself; for nature is like that." (199b26-32) [PSA: "Heal thyself" is like "complete thyself"...]

"There is that which is fully and actively itself [entelecheiai monon], but also that which is what it is, in part, only potentially...." (200b26-27)

WIP
