The Ultimate End of Action: A Critique of Richard Kraut's Aristotle on the Human Good
Timothy D. Roche
In Sim, ed., The Crossroads of Norm and Nature. Rowman and Littlefield, 1995.

"It is important, then, to observe a distinction between the different sorts of remarks that Aristotle makes about the highest good in NE I. We must separate these remarks into two parts, parts that I call the 'formal account' and the 'material account.' The formal account includes what Aristotle says about the good as he considers it apart from any particular view of its specific content....  Thus, when Aristotle claims in I.7 that happiness is an unqualifiedly perfect (haplos teleion) and self-sufficient (autarkes) end, his remarks belong to the formal account.... But when he maintains, after the function argument, that his definition of happiness agrees, to some extent, with the opinion of those who equate happiness with virtue (I.8, 1098b30-31), his remarks belong to the material account." (ROCHE-1995, p. 119)

"On Kraut's view, Aristotle intends to show that theoria is our best choice of an ultimate end because it alone fully satisfies the criteria for an ultimate end described at the beginning of I.2: it is desired/desirable for itself, not desired/desirable for anything else, and such that all other goods are desired/desirable because of it. However, when we turn to Aristotle's account of why theoria should be equated with the perfect happiness, we find no argument purporting to show that that activity satisfies the last criterion mentioned.... What Aristotle conspicuously fails to argue is that all other goods are desired/desirable for the sake of theoria. Moreover, he nowhere claims that the ethical virtues in particular are all desirable (in part) because they causally promote theoria." (ROCHE-1995, pp. 125-126)

"Since the best good is not a transcendent Form but a human achievement, a goal that can be realized directly through *action*, the way into a substantive account of the human good should involve considerations about the distinctive activities or function (ergon) of a human being." (ROCHE-1995, p. 129)

"Aristotle makes numerous remarks in the Ethics [that] add further support to the interpretation I am suggesting. For example, in NE II.6, he reiterates the point that 'the virtue of a human being ... makes him perform his function well' (1106a22-24). The context indicates that the type of virtue he has in mind here is *moral* virtue, for he claims to reveal the truth of his assertion by invoking the doctrine of the mean. In book VI [PSA: EE V], he baldly asserts that 'the function [of man] is performed in accordance with practical wisdom and moral virtue' (1144a6-7; cf. Politics 1253a15-18). Moreover, within the function argument itself he indicates that the human ergon is to be sought in that which is proper (idion) to human beings, and not common (koinon) to other forms of life (1097b33-34). But he regards the perception of moral properties, like good and evil and right and wrong, as part of what is idion to human beings (cf. Politics 1253a15-18). According to Aristotle, the human animal is the only form of life that engages in action (praxis) (EE 122b18-20 [sic CHECKTHIS]). The gods do not engage in action (NE 1178b10-22), nor do any of the lower forms of life. For decision (prohairesis) is the source of action, and other beings are incapable of decision (EE 1225a26-28; NE 1111b12, 1139a31). Consequently, practical (and hence moral) activity is part of what is idion to human beings, and therefore, should be included in the human ergon (cf. NE 1142b28-33; 1145a25-26, 1099b32ff)." (ROCHE-1995, p. 132)

"In the function argument Aristotle is using the expression 'idion' to refer to the *essence* of a thing, not merely what is (absolutely or relatively) peculiar to a thing. This is evident from how Aristotle develops his argument. For he introduces the 'idion constraint' to focus our attention on those capacities that belong properly to the human *soul*, and the soul of an organism, for Aristotle, *is* its essence. So if Aristotle takes a human being to be, essentially, *both* a practical *and* a theoretical being (and it seems beyond doubt that he does), then there is no difficulty in his claiming that our function is strictly determined by what is idion to us. For what is idion to us, and thus constitutes our function, is a *conjunction* of actualized practical and theoretical capacities.... It is precisely this complexity in our function and essence that not only distinguishes us, but *defines* us and situates us between the gods and the beasts in the Aristotelian hierarchy of animate beings." (ROCHE-1995, p. 134)

END
